summary.md, before:

# ChirpStack NMS Code Coverage Review

This file summarizes how the repository implements the features listed in the provided
"Summary of Key Functionalities for LoRaWAN Network Server" and notes extra
capabilities found in the code base.

## Gateway Communication
- Gateways interact with the server through an MQTT based backend. A backend is
  created for each configured region and implements the `GatewayBackend` trait.
  Example initialization is shown below:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/gateway/backend/mod.rs
  pub async fn setup() -> Result<()> {
      let conf = config::get();
      info!("Setting up gateway backends for the different regions");
      for region in &conf.regions {
          if !conf.network.enabled_regions.contains(&region.id) {
              continue;
          }
          let backend =
              mqtt::MqttBackend::new(&region.id, region.common_name, &region.gateway.backend.mqtt)
                  .await?;
          set_backend(&region.id, Box::new(backend)).await;
      }
      Ok(())
  }
  ```
  This means the code depends on the external Gateway Bridge for protocol
  translation, so direct Basics Station or Semtech Packet Forwarder handling is
  not present.

## Message Processing
- Uplink frames are deduplicated using Redis before processing. The function
  `_deduplicate_uplink` creates a deduplication set and waits before collecting
  all frames:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/uplink/mod.rs
  let key = redis_key(format!("up:collect:{{{}:{}:{}}}", region_config_id, tx_info_str, phy_str));
  let lock_key = redis_key(format!("up:collect:{{{}:{}:{}}}:lock", region_config_id, tx_info_str, phy_str));
  let dedup_delay = config::get().network.deduplication_delay;
  let locked = deduplicate_put(&key, &lock_key, dedup_ttl, &event).await?;
  if locked { return Ok(()); }
  sleep(dedup_delay).await;
  let uplink = deduplicate_collect(&key).await?;
  handle_uplink(..., uplink).await?;
  ```
- Downlink scheduling and further processing occur inside other modules once the
  deduplicated frame set is built.

## Device Management
- Devices are stored in a SQL database. `create` validates tenant limits before
  inserting a new device:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/storage/device.rs
  pub async fn create(d: Device) -> Result<Device, Error> {
      let mut c = get_async_db_conn().await?;
      let d: Device = db_transaction::<Device, Error, _>(&mut c, |c| {
          Box::pin(async move {
              let query = tenant::dsl::tenant
                  .select(...)
                  .inner_join(application::table)
                  .filter(application::dsl::id.eq(&d.application_id));
              let t: super::tenant::Tenant = query.first(c).await?;
              let dev_count: i64 = device::dsl::device
                  .select(dsl::count_star())
                  .inner_join(application::table)
                  .filter(application::dsl::tenant_id.eq(&t.id))
                  .first(c)
                  .await?;
              if t.max_device_count != 0 && dev_count as i32 >= t.max_device_count {
                  return Err(Error::NotAllowed("Max number of devices exceeded for tenant".into()));
              }
              diesel::insert_into(device::table).values(&d).get_result(c).await?
          })
      }).await?;
      Ok(d)
  }
  ```
- Temporary runtime data such as `DeviceSession` values are stored in Redis for
  quick access.

## Network Services
- Roaming, join server interaction and other backend interfaces are supported via
  the `backend` crate. Multicast functionality is exposed through a gRPC service:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/api/multicast.rs
  pub struct MulticastGroup { validator: validator::RequestValidator }
  #[tonic::async_trait]
  impl MulticastGroupService for MulticastGroup {
      async fn create(&self, request: Request<api::CreateMulticastGroupRequest>) -> Result<Response<_>, Status> {
          ...
      }
  }
  ```
- A payload codec module provides CayenneLPP and JavaScript based decoding.

## Caching and Performance
- Redis is used for deduplication and for storing runtime state like device
  sessions:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/storage/device_session.rs
  let key = redis_key(format!("device:{{{}}}:ds", dev_eui));
  let v: Vec<u8> = redis::cmd("GET").arg(key).query_async(&mut get_async_redis_conn().await?).await?;
  ```
- Database backends include PostgreSQL and SQLite (selected through features).

## Security
- API requests are authenticated through an interceptor that validates Bearer
  tokens:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/api/auth/mod.rs
  pub fn auth_interceptor(mut req: Request<()>) -> Result<Request<()>, Status> {
      let auth_str = match req.metadata().get("authorization") { ... };
      let auth_str = match auth_str.strip_prefix("Bearer ") { Some(v) => v, None => return Err(Status::unauthenticated(...)) };
      ...
  }
  ```
- OAuth2 login flows are implemented in the `oauth2` module.
- TLS options are configurable for services such as MQTT and database
  connections.

## Scalability and Modularity
- The repository is organized into multiple crates (`chirpstack`,
  `chirpstack-integration`, `backend`, etc.), promoting a modular architecture.
- Gateway backends and integrations are registered dynamically, enabling the
  system to scale horizontally by running multiple instances.

## Additional Functionality
- The code base contains many extra features not listed in the original summary,
  including:
  - Numerous external integrations (MQTT, AMQP, Kafka, HTTP, AWS SNS, Azure
    Service Bus, PostgreSQL and more).
  - Firmware Update Over The Air (FUOTA) support.
  - LoRa Cloud modem geolocation services and other integrations.
  - Metrics collection through Prometheus.

## Conclusion
All major areas from the provided summary are represented in the code, though
basic gateway protocol handling (Basics Station, Semtech UDP) occurs in an
external Gateway Bridge rather than within this repository. The project offers
additional features such as FUOTA, rich integration options, OAuth2
authentication, and extensive metrics that go beyond the initial summary.

Commit message:

docs: explain gateway mqtt websocket

summary.md, after:

# ChirpStack NMS Code Coverage Review

This file summarizes how the repository implements the features listed in the provided
"Summary of Key Functionalities for LoRaWAN Network Server" and notes extra
capabilities found in the code base.

## Gateway Communication
- Gateways interact with the server through an MQTT based backend. A backend is
  created for each configured region and implements the `GatewayBackend` trait.
  Example initialization is shown below:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/gateway/backend/mod.rs
  pub async fn setup() -> Result<()> {
      let conf = config::get();
      info!("Setting up gateway backends for the different regions");
      for region in &conf.regions {
          if !conf.network.enabled_regions.contains(&region.id) {
              continue;
          }
          let backend =
              mqtt::MqttBackend::new(&region.id, region.common_name, &region.gateway.backend.mqtt)
                  .await?;
          set_backend(&region.id, Box::new(backend)).await;
      }
      Ok(())
  }
  ```
  This means the code depends on the external Gateway Bridge for protocol
  translation, so direct Basics Station or Semtech Packet Forwarder handling is
  not present.
- The MQTT backend builds its connection using `MqttOptions::parse_url`, which
  reads the configured `server` URL and supports `tcp`, `ssl` or `ws` schemes.
  Configuration files show this with:
  ```toml
  # MQTT server (e.g. scheme://host:port where scheme is tcp, ssl or ws)
  server = "tcp://localhost:1883"
  ```
  When `ws` or `wss` is used, the Gateway Bridge communicates with ChirpStack
  over MQTT on top of WebSockets.

## Message Processing
- Uplink frames are deduplicated using Redis before processing. The function
  `_deduplicate_uplink` creates a deduplication set and waits before collecting
  all frames:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/uplink/mod.rs
  let key = redis_key(format!("up:collect:{{{}:{}:{}}}", region_config_id, tx_info_str, phy_str));
  let lock_key = redis_key(format!("up:collect:{{{}:{}:{}}}:lock", region_config_id, tx_info_str, phy_str));
  let dedup_delay = config::get().network.deduplication_delay;
  let locked = deduplicate_put(&key, &lock_key, dedup_ttl, &event).await?;
  if locked { return Ok(()); }
  sleep(dedup_delay).await;
  let uplink = deduplicate_collect(&key).await?;
  handle_uplink(..., uplink).await?;
  ```
- Downlink scheduling and further processing occur inside other modules once the
  deduplicated frame set is built.

## Device Management
- Devices are stored in a SQL database. `create` validates tenant limits before
  inserting a new device:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/storage/device.rs
  pub async fn create(d: Device) -> Result<Device, Error> {
      let mut c = get_async_db_conn().await?;
      let d: Device = db_transaction::<Device, Error, _>(&mut c, |c| {
          Box::pin(async move {
              let query = tenant::dsl::tenant
                  .select(...)
                  .inner_join(application::table)
                  .filter(application::dsl::id.eq(&d.application_id));
              let t: super::tenant::Tenant = query.first(c).await?;
              let dev_count: i64 = device::dsl::device
                  .select(dsl::count_star())
                  .inner_join(application::table)
                  .filter(application::dsl::tenant_id.eq(&t.id))
                  .first(c)
                  .await?;
              if t.max_device_count != 0 && dev_count as i32 >= t.max_device_count {
                  return Err(Error::NotAllowed("Max number of devices exceeded for tenant".into()));
              }
              diesel::insert_into(device::table).values(&d).get_result(c).await?
          })
      }).await?;
      Ok(d)
  }
  ```
- Temporary runtime data such as `DeviceSession` values are stored in Redis for
  quick access.

## Network Services
- Roaming, join server interaction and other backend interfaces are supported via
  the `backend` crate. Multicast functionality is exposed through a gRPC service:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/api/multicast.rs
  pub struct MulticastGroup { validator: validator::RequestValidator }
  #[tonic::async_trait]
  impl MulticastGroupService for MulticastGroup {
      async fn create(&self, request: Request<api::CreateMulticastGroupRequest>) -> Result<Response<_>, Status> {
          ...
      }
  }
  ```
- A payload codec module provides CayenneLPP and JavaScript based decoding.

## Caching and Performance
- Redis is used for deduplication and for storing runtime state like device
  sessions:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/storage/device_session.rs
  let key = redis_key(format!("device:{{{}}}:ds", dev_eui));
  let v: Vec<u8> = redis::cmd("GET").arg(key).query_async(&mut get_async_redis_conn().await?).await?;
  ```
- Database backends include PostgreSQL and SQLite (selected through features).

## Security
- API requests are authenticated through an interceptor that validates Bearer
  tokens:
  ```rust
  // chirpstack/src/api/auth/mod.rs
  pub fn auth_interceptor(mut req: Request<()>) -> Result<Request<()>, Status> {
      let auth_str = match req.metadata().get("authorization") { ... };
      let auth_str = match auth_str.strip_prefix("Bearer ") { Some(v) => v, None => return Err(Status::unauthenticated(...)) };
      ...
  }
  ```
- OAuth2 login flows are implemented in the `oauth2` module.
- TLS options are configurable for services such as MQTT and database
  connections.

## Scalability and Modularity
- The repository is organized into multiple crates (`chirpstack`,
  `chirpstack-integration`, `backend`, etc.), promoting a modular architecture.
- Gateway backends and integrations are registered dynamically, enabling the
  system to scale horizontally by running multiple instances.

## Additional Functionality
- The code base contains many extra features not listed in the original summary,
  including:
  - Numerous external integrations (MQTT, AMQP, Kafka, HTTP, AWS SNS, Azure
    Service Bus, PostgreSQL and more).
  - Firmware Update Over The Air (FUOTA) support.
  - LoRa Cloud modem geolocation services and other integrations.
  - Metrics collection through Prometheus.

## Conclusion
All major areas from the provided summary are represented in the code, though
basic gateway protocol handling (Basics Station, Semtech UDP) occurs in an
external Gateway Bridge rather than within this repository. The project offers
additional features such as FUOTA, rich integration options, OAuth2
authentication, and extensive metrics that go beyond the initial summary.
